Docs: Plugins doc review chunk 3 (#68159)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/developers/plugins/development-with-local-grafana.md

---
title: Develop with a local environment
---

# Develop with a local environment

Follow the steps in this guide to set up a development environment where you run Grafana and your plugin locally. With this setup, you can see your changes as you add them.

## Run Grafana in your host

Here's how to clone and run Grafana locally:

1. Download and set up Grafana. Refer to the [developer-guide](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/HEAD/contribute/developer-guide.md).

2. Grafana looks for plugins, by default, in its `data/plugins` directory. You can create a symbolic link to your plugin repository to detect new changes:

   ```bash
   ln -s <plugin-path>/dist data/plugins/<plugin-name>
   ```

> 3. Optional: If the step above doesn't work for you (for example, if you are running on Windows), then modify the default path in the Grafana configuration. Find the default path at `conf/custom.ini`) and point it to your plugin's directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Optional: If the step preceding doesn't work for you (for example, if you are running on Windows), then modify the default path in the Grafana configuration. Find the default path at `conf/custom.ini`) and point it to your plugin's directory:
```

---
title: Develop with a local environment
---

# Develop with a local environment

Follow the steps in this guide to set up a development environment where you run Grafana and your plugin locally. With this setup, you can see your changes as you add them.

> ## Before you begin

Reviewer 2: The developer guide covers this, we could remove this section.

Author: Not totally sure if you're suggesting the removal of the opening sentence or the "before you begin" section. We can't remove the opening as that's required by our guidelines.

Removing the "before you begin" section. However, in general, I think the plugin guide doesn't say enough about prerequisites. Of course that doesn't mean that we need to add prerequisites to the individual topics instead of the introduction though.

## Run Grafana with docker-compose

Another option is to run Grafana with docker-compose so that it runs in a container. To do so, create the `docker-compose` file in your plugin directory.

> > **Note:**: If your plugin already includes a docker-compose file, then skip this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
If your plugin already includes a docker-compose file, then skip this step.
{{% /admonition %}}
```

## Run Grafana with docker-compose

Another option is to run Grafana with docker-compose so that it runs in a container. To do so, create the `docker-compose` file in your plugin directory.

> > **Note:**: If your plugin already includes a docker-compose, then skip this step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:**: If your plugin already includes a docker-compose file, then skip this step.
```

    ports:
      - 3000:3000/tcp
    volumes:

>       # Use your plugin folder (for example, redshift-datasource)

Author: Created https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/68500 to track.

   yarn watch
   ```

> 2. Start the Grafana backend and frontend:

Reviewer 2: are these steps still accurate? They conflict with those in the developer guide...

Author: Right, I'm not sure. I'll ask a developer to (re-)review this section.

Author: Esteban said that the instructiosn aren't inaccurate because there are different ways of getting set up. The trouble is that the docs aren't opinionated enough, and we need to specify one way (best way) to get it done. Tracking in https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/68500

   yarn start
   ```

   2. Or, with docker-compose, in your plugin directory, run:

   ```bash
   docker-compose up
   ```

After this, you should be able to see your plugin listed in Grafana, and then you can test your changes.

If you make a change in the frontend, you must refresh your browser. However, changes in the backend may require that you rebuild your plugin binaries and reload the plugin (`mage && mage reloadPlugin` for local development, or run `docker-compose up` again if you are using docker-compose).

## Run your backend plugin with a debugger

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
The following method only works with a local Grafana instance and currently doesn't work with Docker.
{{% /admonition %}}

Running a backend plugin with a debugger is supported in Visual Studio Code and GoLand out of the box, but it can also work with any other IDE or debugger.

You can run a backend plugin and attach a debugger to it, which allows you to set breakpoints and debug your backend plugin directly from your IDE of choice:

1. Go to your plugin's folder.

> 1. Check your `go.mod` to make sure `grafana-plugin-sdk-go` are at least on `v0.156.0`

Reviewer 2: Nit: I'm not sure why this is 'are' not 'is'?

   yarn start
   ```

>    b. Or, with docker-compose in your plugin directory, run:

Reviewer 2: the second comma is important, docker-compose will be in your plugin directory, so a user may go yup thats my situation, but they need to issue the command from within the plugin directory, not the grafana source code directory as above

Reviewer 2: I can't see any update or change related to this?

Author: got it

   ```bash
   docker-compose up
   ```

After this, you should be able to see your plugin listed in Grafana, and then you can test your changes. 

> If you make a change in the fronted, you must refresh your browser. However, changes in the backend may require that you rebuild your plugin binaries and reload the plugin (`mage && mage reloadPlugin` for local development, or run `docker-compose up` again if you are using docker-compose).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you make a change in the frontend, you must refresh your browser. However, changes in the backend may require that you rebuild your plugin binaries and reload the plugin (`mage && mage reloadPlugin` for local development, or run `docker-compose up` again if you are using docker-compose).
```

> If you make a change in the fronted, you must refresh your browser. However, changes in the backend may require that you rebuild your plugin binaries and reload the plugin (`mage && mage reloadPlugin` for local development, or run `docker-compose up` again if you are using docker-compose).

Reviewer 2: additionally, the developer guide doesn't specify that you need to refresh the browser, so is this still true?

Author: Added https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/68420 to track

> If you make a change in the fronted, you must refresh your browser. However, changes in the backend may require that you rebuild your plugin binaries and reload the plugin (`mage && mage reloadPlugin` for local development, or run `docker-compose up` again if you are using docker-compose).

Author: got it

## Run your backend plugin with a debugger

> Note: The following method only works with a local Grafana instance and currently doesn't work with Docker.

> Running a backend plugin with a debugger is a feature that supports Visual Studio Code and GoLand out of the box, but it can also work with any other IDE or debugger.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running a backend plugin with a debugger is supported in Visual Studio Code and GoLand out of the box, but it can also work with any other IDE or debugger.
```

You can run a backend plugin and attach a debugger to it, which allows you to set breakpoints and debug your backend plugin directly from your IDE of choice:

1. Go to your plugin's folder.

> 1. Make sure that your `go.mod` and `grafana-plugin-sdk-go` are at least on `v0.156.0`

Reviewer 2: This rewrite doesn't quite make sense, you are checking a file `go.mod` for a line like https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-examples/blob/main/examples/app-with-backend/go.mod#L5 to check the SDK is at a specific version

Author: Thanks. I have changed to "Check your `go.mod` to make sure...". I misunderstood because "and" is a bit ambiguous.

1. Run the config (with or without the debugger).

1. If Grafana isn't already running, run it.

> > **Note:** If you re-run the configuration, Grafana automatically reloads the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% admonition type="note" %}}
If you re-run the configuration, Grafana automatically reloads the plugin.
{{% /admonition %}}
```

> > **Note:** If you re-run the configuration, Grafana  automatically reloads the plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you re-run the configuration, Grafana automatically reloads the plugin.
```

### Other IDEs

Configure your code editor to run the following steps:

> 1. Build the executable file with debug flags.

Author: Not strictly necessary, but Google style seems to use "executable" as an adjective to "file" as noun. I don't care either way really. https://developers.google.com/style/filenames

   ```
   mage build:debug
   ```

> 1. Run the plugin's executable file (inside `dist`) with `-standalone -debug` flags.

Reviewer 2: as above

   ```
   ./gpx_xyz_linux_amd64 -standalone -debug
   ```
1. Attach a debugger to the process.

1. If Grafana isn't already running, run it.

> If you re-run the configuration, Grafana automatically reloads the plugin.

### Notes

> - Grafana prints all logs in the plugin's `stdout` rather than in Grafana logs.

Author: @xnyo What do you think?

> - Grafana prints all logs in the plugin's `stdout` rather than in Grafana logs.

Reviewer 3: @josmperez the logging is done by the plugin because Grafana is running in a separate process.

I added this note to let the developer know they should look for logs into the plugin's console rather than Grafana's console

> - Grafana prints all logs in the plugin's `stdout` rather than in Grafana logs.

Author: Reverted my change.

> - If the backend plugin doesn't serve requests after you turn off debug mode, you can force a reset to the standalone mode. To do so, delete the files `dist/standalone.txt`, `dist/pid.txt`, and  the executable file, and then restart Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the backend plugin doesn't serve requests after you turn off debug mode, you can force a reset to the standalone mode. To do so, delete the files `dist/standalone.txt`, `dist/pid.txt`, and the executable file, and then restart Grafana.
```

Author: thankfully, Prettier caught these sorts of issues. Will run it sooner next time.

> - Grafana doesn't support debugging backend plugins running inside Docker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Grafana doesn't support debugging backend plugins running inside Docker. But this is a [planned enhancement](https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/issues/685).
```
